---
date: 2004-06-01
title: Modelling tissue growth and development
short_title: Tissue growth and development
thumbnail: /images/research/continuum-biophysics/constricted-ecf-flow.png
description: A continuum theory of multiphase mixtures for modelling biological growth.
category: primary
featured: yes
start_date: 2002
end_date: 2007
---

Prompted by compelling clinical reports evidencing the pervasive role
of mechanical factors influencing biological growth, our modelling
work is aimed at gaining a deeper understanding of the biophysical
bases underlying these influences.

<div class="showcase">“All science is either physics or stamp
collecting.”  — [Ernest
Rutherford](http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Ernest_Rutherford "Need more
quotations?") (1871 – 1937)</div>

The utility of the resulting mathematical and computational framework
extends across disciplines by helping steer and interpret experimental
work, both under physiological and pathological cases of
interest. Currently, our focus is directed toward a better
understanding of the mechanics of growing soft tissue, specifically
tendon.

![Engineerd
 construct](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/one-construct.jpg
 "One of Sarah’s engineered tendon constructs")

Our biological model: Sarah’s engineered tendon constructs.

This web page contains some highlights of our modelling effort. For
more detailed expositions, the interested reader is directed toward
more [formal articles](http://localhost/writing/).

## <a id="formulation">General formulation for growth in tissues</a>

![Continuum
 potatoes](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/tissue-continuum.png
 "The tissue as a continuum potato")

The tissue as a continuum potato.

_Growth_ in biological tissue is a direct outcome of cascades of
complex, intracellular, biochemical reactions involving numerous
species, their diffusion across cell membranes, and transport through
the extra-cellular matrix. Both reaction and diffusion/transport are
influenced by mechanics in a number of ways. Our modelling effort
proposes a general continuum field formulation for growth capable of
simulating this rich observed behaviour, and proceeds to specialise it
incorporating different modelling assumptions—such as the use of an
enzyme kinetics-based growth law—to better represent cases of
interest.

![Enzyme
 kinetics](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/enzyme-kinetics.png
 "Enzyme kinetics-based growth law")

Enzyme kinetics-based growth law.

Recognising that a growing tissue is an open system undergoing
irreversible thermodynamics, the model incorporates the physics of
multi-phase reacting systems, and deduces balance laws and a
constitutive framework obeying the Second Law of Thermodynamics.

![The balance of mass and momenta for all
 species](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/balance-laws.png "The
 balance of mass and momenta for all species")

Reference configuration statements of the balance of mass and momenta
for all species.

Notably, the transport of the extracellular fluid relative to the
matrix is shown to be driven by the gradients of stress, concentration
and chemical potential—a coupling of mass transport and mechanics that
emerges directly.

![Driving
 forces](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/driving-force.png
 "Constitutive relationship for fluid flux")

A constitutive relationship relating the fluid flux to various driving
forces.

Assumptions central to existing mechanics theories, such as the nature
of the split of deformation maps across the different species
involved, and those on momentum transfers between interacting species,
are revisited, analysed and carefully revised in cases where they
limit the biophysical correctness of predicted growth phenomena.

Coupled, non-linear partial differential equations arise from the
theory to describe the complex physics. These differential equations
are solved using a finite element scheme based on _operator-splits_;
incorporating non-linear projection methods to treat
incompressibility, energy-momentum conserving algorithms for dynamics,
and mixed methods for stress gradient-driven fluxes.

![FEM Mesh](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/mesh.png "A
 representative mesh used in the finite element calculations")

A representative mesh used in the finite element calculations.

One highlight of the numerical methods is a rigorous treatment of
numerical stability issues that arise with any operator-splitting
scheme. This analysis is critical to the ability to distinguish
physical instabilities, such as unbounded growth of tumours, from
those that are artifacts of the numerical methods. Another key feature
is the reformulation of the reaction-transport equations to embed the
incompressibility constraint on the fluid phase, enabling a
straightforward implementation of numerical stabilisation in the
advection-dominated limit.

![Stabilisable form of the solute transport
 equation](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/stabilisable-form.png
 "The solute transport equation in classical, stabilisable form")

The solute transport equation in classical, stabilisable form.

## <a id="mechanics">Mechanics of growing tissue</a>

![Kinematics of
 growth](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/growth-kinematics.png
 "The kinematics of growth")

The kinematics of growth.

Using model geometries and imposing classes of initial and boundary
conditions approximating experiments in our laboratory, the
computational framework developed is used to demonstrate aspects of
the coupled phenomena as the tissue grows. In these foundational
calculations, only two phases—fluid and collagen—are included. The
collagen phase is modelled by the anisotropic worm-like chain model,
and the fluid phase is modelled as ideal and nearly
incompressible. The interconversion between these two phases is
modelled using first-order chemical kinetics.

For a tissue undergoing finite strains, the transport equations can be
formulated, mathematically, in terms of quantities with respect to
either the reference or current (deformed) configuration. However, the
physics of fluid-tissue interactions, and the imposition of relevant
boundary conditions, is best understood and represented in the current
configuration.

<div class="comment">[![Video
icon](http://localhost/layout/images/icons/darkgrey/video-x-generic.png
"View the video
(MPG)")](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/pinch_cont4.mpg) Watch
the [unbounded build-up of
fluid](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/pinch_cont4.mpg) due to
the (unphysical) specification of constant reference fluid
concentration boundary conditions, while attempting to simulate a
loaded tendon immersed in a bath.</div>

<div class="comment">

### Having difficulty viewing a video?

[![Help
icon](http://localhost/layout/images/icons/darkgrey/help-browser.png
"Download the required codecs for
Windows")](http://sourceforge.net/projects/ffdshow/) In order to make
their sizes more palatable for download, the videos on this page have
been compressed using different algorithms. If you are having
difficulty viewing any of them, please follow the following
instructions on acquiring the necessary
[codecs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Codec):

» Windows users need to download and install the [ffdshow codec
pack](http://sourceforge.net/projects/ffdshow/). Upon installation,
you should be able to play the videos using any installed video
player, including Windows Media Player.

» GNU/Linux and Mac OS X users need to download and install either
[VLC Media Player](http://www.videolan.org/vlc/) or
[MPlayer](http://www.mplayerhq.hu/design7/news.html) (with a complete
set of codecs) to play the videos.</div>

When a tendon having an initially-uniform distribution of collagen is
immersed into a nutrient-rich bath, nutrient-rich fluid is transported
into the tissue, and growth occurs due to the formation of additional
collagen.

![Final distribution of
 collagen](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/swell-after-growth.png
 "Distribution of collagen after growth")

Distribution of collagen after growth.

<div class="comment">[![Video
icon](http://localhost/layout/images/icons/darkgrey/video-x-generic.png
"View the video (DivX
AVI)")](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/swell_cont5.avi) The
infusing nutrient-rich fluid causes the tendon to grow. Watch the
[collagen concentration
increase](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/swell_cont5.avi) over
half-an-hour.</div>

There is a rapid, fluid transport-dominated swelling of the tendon
initially as it is immersed into the fluid bath. This is followed by a
slower, reaction-driven growth phase.

![Volume
 evolution](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/swell-volume-evolution.png
 "Rapid swelling of a tendon immersed in a bath")

Rapid swelling of a tendon immersed in a bath.

<div class="comment">[![Video
icon](http://localhost/layout/images/icons/darkgrey/video-x-generic.png
"View the video
(MPG)")](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/swell_cont4.mpg) Pay
close attention to observe the initial, [fluid transport-dominated
swelling of the
tissue](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/swell_cont4.mpg),
followed by much slower reaction-driven growth.</div>

On performing a uniaxial tension test on the tendon before and after
growth, it is observed that the grown tissue—having a higher
concentration of collagen—is stiffer and stronger; which is in
accordance with experiment.

![Uniaxial stress-strain
 curves](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/swell-growth-mechanics.png
 "The grown tissue is stiffer and stronger")

The grown tissue is stiffer and stronger.

Upon subjecting the tendon to a load-unload cycle, a stress-strain
curve characteristic of viscoelastic tissue is observed. Here, the
area between the loading and unloading paths is the hysteretic energy
loss due to viscous dissipation.

![Viscoelastic
 effects](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/tendon-viscoelasticity.png
 "Viscoelastic effects observed in the model")

Viscoelastic effects observed in the model.

<div class="comment">[![Video
icon](http://localhost/layout/images/icons/darkgrey/video-x-generic.png
"View the video (FFMPEG
AVI)")](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/cyclic-sin.ffmpeg.avi)
Observe the [induced fluid
flow](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/cyclic-sin.ffmpeg.avi) as
the tendon is subjected to a cyclically varying load. Friction between
the solid and fluid phases results in energy dissipation.</div>

Qualitatively, this viscoelastic behaviour compares favourably with
our corresponding experimental tests on two-week-old tibialis anterior
tendons in the laboratory.

![Hysteresis in
 tendon](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/hysteresis-experiment.png
 "Hysteresis observed in experiments on TA tendons")

Hysteresis observed in experiments on tibialis anterior tendons.

Application of a constrictive radial load—where the maximum strain in
the radial direction is experienced half-way through the height of the
tendon—to a tendon immersed in a fluid-filled bath results in a
stress-gradient induced fluid flux. This drives fluid away from the
central plane.

![Vertical fluid flux in a constricted
 tendon](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/constrict-vertical-flux.png
 "Vertical fluid flux in a constricted tendon")

Vertical fluid flux in a constricted tendon.

<div class="comment">[![Video
icon](http://localhost/layout/images/icons/darkgrey/video-x-generic.png
"View the video (DivX
AVI)")](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/constrict_total_flux_3_4.avi)
The constrictive radial load sets up a [fluid flux in the vertical
direction](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/constrict_total_flux_3_4.avi),
driving fluid away from the central plane toward the top and bottom
faces of the tendon.</div>

This pressure wave set up in the fluid travels toward the top and
bottom faces, and as the fluid leaves these surfaces, we observe that
the tendon relaxes.

![Displacement of the top
 face](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/constrict-top-face-displacement.png
 "Relaxation of the top face of a constricted tendon")

Relaxation of the top face of a constricted tendon.

<div class="comment">[![Video
icon](http://localhost/layout/images/icons/darkgrey/video-x-generic.png
"View the video (DivX
AVI)")](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/constrict_ref_conc_3.avi)
The stress gradient-driven fluid flux causes a [decrease in the
reference fluid
concentration](/video/research/continuum-biophysics/constrict_ref_conc_3.avi)
near the central plane. Pay close attention to observe the relaxation
of the top face as the fluid leaves the surface.</div>

## <a id="applications">Drug delivery and wound healing</a>

Having established the fundamental behaviour of the formulation, we
now turn to more sophisticated applications.

In order to model localised, bolus delivery of regulatory chemicals to
the tendon while accounting for mechanical effects, we introduce
additional species: a solute, and a distribution of fibroblasts that
are characterised by their cell concentration. Both concentration
gradient-driven mass transport and stress gradient-driven fluid flow
are incorporated into this illustration, which demonstrates the use of
the formulation in studying the efficacy of drug delivery
mechanisms. Michaelis-Menten enzyme kinetics is used to determine the
rates of solute consumption and, consequently, collagen production.

![Michaelis-Menten enzyme
 kinetics](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/michaelis-menten.png
 "Michaelis-Menten enzyme kinetics")

Michaelis-Menten enzyme kinetics.

In addition to subjecting the tendon immersed in the bath to the
constrictive radial load described earlier, a solute-rich bulb with
its centre on the axis of the tendon is introduced. The relatively
small magnitude of the fluid mobility—with respect to the diffusion
coefficient for the solute through the fluid—results in a relatively
small stress gradient-driven flux, and the transport of the solute is
diffusion dominated. Consequently, as time progresses, the solute
primarily diffuses locally, and as the solute concentration in a
region increases, the enzyme-kinetics model predicts a small source
term for collagen, and we observe nominal growth.

![Collagen concentration at an early
 time](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/medicate-solute-concentration.png
 "Collagen growth localised to regions of medication")

Collagen growth localised to regions of medication.

The following computation demonstrates the capability of the
formulation in studying the self-healing of damaged
tissue. Incorporating a cell-signalling parameter into the chemical
kinetics, the formation of collagen is spatially biased toward damaged
regions of the tissue.

![Chemical kinetics with damage
 healing](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/damage-healing-source.png
 "Chemical kinetics with a damage-healing parameter")

Chemical kinetics with a damage-healing parameter.

Turning to damaged skin as our tissue of interest, we begin by
delineating the damaged regions—characterised by a sudden reduction in
the concentration of collagen—from the rest of the tissue.

![Damaged region of
 skin](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/damaged-region.png
 "Damaged region of skin demarcated by green")

Damaged region of skin demarcated by green.

This damaged tissue is introduced to a nutrient-rich environment, and
the cell-signalling parameter induces preferential growth in these
damaged regions. We allow this healing process to evolve under two
different conditions—under no load and under uniaxial stress—to study
the influence of mechanics on the properties of healed tissue.

The anisotropic nature of these tissues arises from the
microstructural alignment of their constituent collagen fibers, and
the directionality of newly-deposited fibers are determined by the
eigenvectors of the applied stress field. When the healing process is
carried out under uniaxial stress, with the orientation of the stress
being defined by the initially-stiff directionality of the tissue, the
newly-deposited collagen has anisotropic properties which are
identical to collagen in the undamaged tissue. This results in a
healed tissue indistinguishable from the undamaged tissue.

However, when the healing process is carried out under no load, the
newly-deposited collagen consists of arbitrarily-directed fibers,
resulting in a formation of isotropic tissue in the damaged regions as
the tissue heals. This results in a healed tissue being more compliant
than the undamaged tissue along the originally-stiff direction of the
tissue. Thus, upon being subjected to a load, these compliant healed
regions experience a reduced stress.

![Vertical stress in
 skin](/images/research/continuum-biophysics/damaged-vertical-stress.png
 "Vertical stress in skin recovering from damage")

Vertical stress in skin recovering from damage.

This result is analogous to the experimentally observed hypertrophic
scarring of skin as it recovers from damage under no applied load.

[hyperelastic]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperelastic_material
